Good morning.
Can you hear me?
Can Tim? Yes, I, I can.
Excellent. Great to have you along
with us this morning, Marcello.
Thanks for your time. Uh, we've received your petition
and, uh, keen to hear from you in support of that.
We have 10 minutes set down for that this morning, uh,
which will include questions.
If you are happy to leave time for questions.
I'm sure there will be some from the committee.
Uh, we're live streaming this, and I'll hand over to you.
Well, ko, Mr. Chair
and Koto, thanks for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, I'd like to start by reiterating the petition
that I'm the name petitioner for Simply Advocates
for a policy that is common sense.
Um, each year New Zealand imports large volumes
of animal products that will produce using systems
that we have banned here in New Zealand
because of their cruelty to animals, things like sale stall
and barren battery cages
that importing really undermines the spirit
and effectiveness of our animal welfare laws
and our reputation.
It also creates an unlevel playing field
for our local farmers
and betrays the expectations of the public
who expected cruelty to end.
Got it. With our sort of regulations,
but then has just seen it being
outsourced to other countries.
This petition seeks to close that imports loophole
and apply New Zealand animal welfare standards
to all animal products sold in this country,
including imports.
It's notable that this afternoon, another committee, uh,
the primary production committee will be begin reading
submissions on a government bill that seeks to extend vow
and crates for pigs indefinitely.
An argument advanced by the pork industry for the necessity
of the perpetuation of such cruelty is
that any improvements in our animal welfare laws would make
our industry uncompetitive.
This petition is the other side of that coin.
It seeks to protect
and encourage high standards in New Zealand so
that we can be a leader in animal welfare,
not engage in a race to the bottom.
Not only is it just the right thing to do, it's also legally
and practically, uh, and economically viable.
We can see that the World Trade Organization case,
or both permits the import
and sale restrictions based on animal welfare standards
under the, the public moral exception of,
uh, GAT Article 20.
And there's ample evidence that an animal welfare,
animal welfare is a proven ethical concern
and would fit within that public morals exception.
Uh, moreover, it's, it's pretty clear, um, that any
of our free trade agreements, um,
wouldn't prevent applying welfare standards to imports.
Um, it's not only sort
of legally possible, uh, it's practical.
There was a report issued just earlier this week
that indicated that many of the countries
that export animal products to us, uh, are ready
to meet our standards that actually includes sping crates.
If the, if the government wished do the right thing
and fully ban them as the public wants,
there would be the possibility of having, uh, free farrow,
uh, port to be imported into New Zealand.
Um, moreover,
although there, there are some arguments, uh,
against the saying
that we'd be inviting retaliation from other countries,
putting some of our folk in the primary, uh, sector at risk,
uh, it's, it's pretty clear that through analysis
that this is not only highly unlikely,
it's likely impossible.
I'm happy to expand upon that in questions.
Um, moreover, it's very clear
that other jurisdictions are looking at
similar sort of moves.
So for example, the EU itself plans to require imports
to meet its own standards,
suggesting not only will they have an object,
not only will they not have an objection to our move here,
uh, it'll end up becoming a full alignment with any sort
of import requirements that we have.
So the question is why would we be dragging
our heels on this?
We should be ahead of the curve.
It's something that simply just must happen for animals
that are suffering overseas for New Zealand in
for the New Zealand market, for our reputation
for New Zealanders who have demanded better
and to make things fairer for our farmers
who right now see overseas producers put ahead of them.
Uh, simply put, if it's too cruel to produce here,
it's too cruel to import a law on imports.
Just makes sense. Um, I'm happy
to take questions from the committee.
Alright, thank you very much for that.
Uh, Dana Kirkpatrick,
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, I'm interested, uh, thank you for your submission
and your, um, concern in this area.
I, um, do have some questions, but I'll start with one
and then maybe come back to the others.
Um, I'm interested in your point you made about the risk
of trade retaliation is very low
and I'm, um, interested to understand more about
how you've arrived at that, um, that statement.
Yeah, look, happy to sort of expand upon that, uh, Dean,
and thank you for your question.
I, I guess the key point here is to sort of understand
how practically that would work.
So if, if, if a country wanted to retaliate on the basis
of sort of animal welfare, let's use the example for example
of uh, sort of outdoor farming and,
and, um, requiring say dairy cow to sort of be in, in, in,
in, uh, in the shelter.
Look, let's put it aside, that probably they should be,
and we should probably be trying to sort
of raise our welfare standards there.
Many other countries, welfare
standards currently don't exceed New Zealand.
So what they would have to do to reci, uh, to reciprocate
and retaliate is to first lift their standards.
Um, and then they would have to apply them to every single,
um, importer across the board.
They couldn't target New Zealand
because that would amount to sort
of discriminatory practice.
Um, and so doing so would likely sort of impact, um,
their much more so
and their other sort of trading partners than New Zealand.
It's really about just how they would sort
of practically engage in that.
They wouldn't be able to discriminate in that way
and discrimination would be unlikely.
The the second reason is to sort
of why we've come to that conclusion.
And this isn't simply just reckons, this is on the basis
of very clear legal advice.
Um, we've received from the one
of New Zealand's top international trade lawyer, Dr.
Tracy Epps, what she indicates
that they would have no need to re uh, retaliate.
We've gotta remember that uh, we, uh,
exports New Zealand in terms of, uh,
animal products coming into seize from their perspective,
um, is is very low.
So pork, um,
and is the exporters total production, um, of uh,
uh, import of, of those products to New Zealand
and that's to a very small amount of their market.
It's not like New Zealand sort of putting these standards up
with sort of something crushed the EU
or sort of crushed the Canadian sort of pork market.
So it would be very unclear as to why they would seek
to retaliate in that way.
Uh, I guess that's the point though, isn't it, is
that the effect is not great, uh, for them,
but the effect for us by a potential retaliation is massive.
So with respect, um, maybe this, that is
what I was just saying, that
because there, there would be no key reason for them
to retaliate, they won't retaliate.
Not only will they not be able to legally do it
because that would amount to discriminatory practice and
therefore sort of a breach of trade practices and,
and within sort of the WTO rules there would
be a need for them to do it.
So, so I'm saying there is absolutely no need for them
to retaliation, so it's a highly unlikely,
if not impossible, um, outcome.
Next question Steve Abel.
Yeah, and so just to clarify that point, um,
any rule imposed has to be imposed on absolutely everybody.
Uh, i on the country itself, it's loan,
domestic production plus every other country from which it's
importing and that's what you're proposing We do.
We are simply saying we would impose
the same animal welfare laws
as we have in this country on every country importing to us.
So it's a universal application we
expect of our own farmers.
We expect that of, uh, overseas importers.
That, just to clarify your first point,
and the second question I've got is, um, is it also correct
Marcelo that overseas countries from which we already
import also produce pork, for example,
that meets our welfare standards
and is it even exceeds our welfare standards?
So we wouldn't be restricting trade from any nation,
we'd only be requiring them
to send us the higher welfare pork
that they're already producing.
I welcome the clarification, Steve.
It's a much more eloquent way of, uh, than I put it,
but yes, on both of those points
here, that, that that's correct.
Number one, if they wanted to sort of retaliate, they'd have
to apply those standards to everyone else in the world
and they simply won't do that.
Right. And secondly, as you say,
they already have the capacity to sort
of meet our higher import standards.
They have the capacity to meet our animal welfare
legislation or would we be requiring is for them to do so?
Yeah. Okay. Look, thank you. Congratulations.
The work you've done on this has been very, very good.
Um, but I guess the reality,
and it will be no doubt advice from MFA is
that the retaliation might not come through pork,
but it may come through other exports and,
and so dairy, so you acknowledge that
and I understand the point you're making,
which is a very sound one over pork.
Uh, you know, we can source it from um,
a higher welfare standards supplies, uh,
but the one-off arbitrary intervention, which is
what it might be called, could result in in dairy
or impacts on something else. Do you acknowledge that?
Um, I'd have to sort of push back against
that dam unfortunately
because I think that number one, again, they would need
to sort of impose the sort
of same standards on all dairy imports in that, in
that instance across the board, they wouldn't be able
to target New Zealand specifically again.
So even if they used a different industry
to retaliate against New Zealand's actions here, um,
then they would have to sort of apply the same sort
of standards to all of their imports.
They again, wouldn't be able to discriminate.
Um, that seems like an extremely sort
of conservative approach that the ministry
of Foreign Affairs and trade has taken on this instance.
And I would sort of suggest to them that they have, um,
some fairly good negotiators in their team
and I'd sort of put a little bit more faith in the sort
of the capacity of New Zealand
to sort of engage in that market.
But as I say, our legal analysis shows
that they wouldn't be able to even sort
of pick a different industry to sort of retaliate in
that way because again, they would need
to lift their own standards, number one
and number two, apply those standards across the board
to all of their trading partners.
And so to retaliate to New Zealand, they had to essentially,
well, what we would like them to do,
raise their animal welfare standards,
but to then impose those standards across the board.
And we just don't see that as a, an extremely likely
or even sort of possible sort of outcome in this instance.
Thank you. Okay, so final quick question from Lauren.
Thanks Mr. Chair. And um, thank you Marcello.
I guess my question is on a little bit
of the flip side of that.
Um, given New Zealand is quite a small market
and this would essentially be a, a trade barrier, um,
extra compliance, would it, would it affect I guess the
therefore the supply of pork
and invariably push up the price
of pork here in New Zealand given um,
we're already in like quite a tight cost of living crisis
and uh, I'm really cognizant of that as well.
So I just would like to know your thoughts on, um, whether
that could happen, whether, whether some of these, um,
suppliers could just say, oh, you know what, New Zealand,
you're too smaller market, see you later.
Um, uh, have you done any, um, research into
that kind of possibility?
Yeah, thanks for the question, Laura. Two points on that.
One, our industry sort of should be protected in,
in New Zealand sort of high quality sort of pork products
to the extent that we sort of produce producing at the
moment should sort of be able to to, to,
um, have that shortfall.
But number two, there are countries in the world
and there are markets in the world with
that meet our standards
and would be able to sort of produce that shortfall.
So there is, you know, uh, there is no sort of risk in terms
of that sort of cost of living.
I would sort of emphasize the point though that we want
to be leaders in this and we want to ensure high quality,
uh, animal welfare compliance sort of practices here.
Cost of living is yes. So one aspect of this
and we are protecting sort of our industries.
We are, uh, protecting sort of our animals, uh, in,
in the way that they are farmed.
Um, and we are encouraging other countries
to sort of lift their standards too.
But yes, they would be able to supply us with those sorts
of high quality animal welfare compliant imports.
Hey, thank you very much for your time this morning
Marcelo, really appreciate your insights
and support of your petition.
Uh, it's given us food for thought
and we'll be discussing it further.
So thanks again for coming on.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you. Thank you.